README.md, before:

# What is this software about?

A simple tool for the quality control of source documents.    
Designed to fulfill the requirements of a compliant software in EU | Life Science respective to the GDPR.

- [An overview](#overview)
- [Quickstart](#quickstart)
- [Local development](#local_dev)
    - [Get a database](#database)
    - [Initialize the database](#init_database)
    - [Build assets](#build_assets)
    - [Run the app](#run_app)
- [Deployment](#deployment)
    - [Debugging](#debugging)
- [Advanced configuration](#advanced_config)
- [Advanced Working with the Command Line Interface](#cli)
- [This project in biological words](#biology_analogon)
  

<a name="overview"></a>
# An overview

-   build with: Python Flask
-   software design pattern: Model-View-Controller (MVC)
-   runs offline: `npm` downloads the JS packages and `parcel.js` bundles them, that they are executable in the project
-   deploy it on a server with: `gunicorn`

![](project_overview.png)

<a name="quickstart"></a>
# Quickstart
1. `cp .example.env .env`
2. `docker-compose up -d voy`
3. `docker-compose exec voy voy database init`    
4. http://localhost:5000/

Optional (for backups):    
4. `cp ofelia.example.ini ofelia.ini`       
5. `docker-compose up -d db-backup`


<a name="local_dev"></a>
# Getting started with local development
1. Create a working virtualenv with `make venv` and activate it with `. venv/bin/activate`

<a name="database"></a>
## 1. Get a database
Don't want to install a local PostgreSQL database?    

1. Copy `.example.env` to `.env`. Use the example values or adapt them to your preference.
2. You can now start your database with `docker-compose up -d db`

<a name="init_database"></a>
## 2. Initialize the database
1. Create the database and the tables with `voy database init`

<a name="init_database_via_docker"></a>
### 2.1 Initialize the database via Docker
When using the docker setup, one can initialize the database by opening a shell inside the python docker container.
1. Start the QC Database App with `docker-compose up -d voy`
2. Open a shell inside the now running container with `docker-compose exec voy /bin/bash`
3. Setup the database like normal in the steps above.

<a name="build_assets"></a>
## 3. Build assets
1. Install node modules with `npm install`
2. Bundle assets with `npm run build`

<a name="develop_assets"></a>
### 3.1 Develop assets
For a more convenient way of working with the CSS and JS assets, run `npm run watch`.

<a name="run_app"></a>
## 4. Run the app 
1. Start the app with `flask run -p 5000`
2. Open http://localhost:5000/

### 4.1 Run the app in Docker
1. Start the app with `docker-compose up -d voy`.   
2. Open http://localhost/ (Port maybe different depending on your `.env` configuration.)

# Database migrations
To enable updates for live instances of our software, it is crucial to have database migrations. Database migrations
offer a way to adapt an existing databases so that they are on par with the updates made in the code. All this while
preserving the data contained.

Here is how to work with them:

## Create migrations when the model changed
For upgrading live databases it is necessary to always create migrations when changing to the model.

**Attention**: The library we are using, **Flask-Migrate**, internally uses Alembic, which has some **limitations** when
it comes to detecting changes.
**Read more** about that here: https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/autogenerate.html#what-does-autogenerate-detect-and-what-does-it-not-detect

To create a migration:
- Run `flask db migrate -m "<Migration Message>"`. Make sure to enter a meaningful `<Migration Message>`.
- Add the created migration(s) under `migrations/versions` to git.
- Commit your changes to the database model together with the migrations.

## Updating a running database instance
To update a running database instance, just refresh the `migrations` folder from source control and run
`flask db upgrade` command.

<a name="deployment"></a>
# Deployment with Docker
This app includes a Docker setup for live deployment. Here is how to use it:

## Initial Setup
For the initial setup, just follow the instructions described in steps 1., 2.1, 3. and 4.1

## Updating
The setup relies on mounting the code into the container, so code changes are relatively easy to propagate.    
However, when the python dependencies change, a rebuild of the Docker image is necessary.

- Has your `requirements.txt` changed?
  1. Run `docker-compose build` to have Docker update the image with the new dependencies.
  2. Recreate the running containers with `docker-compose up -d voy`    
  
- Only changes in code?
  1. If you changed your static files run: `npm run build`
  2. Gunicorn does not reload your code, so you need to restart your `voy` service: `docker-compose restart voy`

## Scheduled database backups
The Docker setup also includes a container for creating scheduled backups of the database. Here is how to set them up:

1. Copy `ofelia.example.ini` to `ofelia.ini`. Use the example values or adapt them to your preference. See: [mcuadros/ofelia](https://github.com/mcuadros/ofelia)
2. You can now start your database backups with `docker-compose up -d db-backup`

### Adapt the location of the backups
The location where the backups are stored can be adapted in the `.env` file with the `DB_BACKUP_DIR` variable.

<a name="debugging"></a>
## Debugging
To debug gunicorn you can add the `--preload` flag to it. This will give you stack traces to errors that occurred.    
The `--preload` flag is now set by default when using the Docker-Compose setup.

To see the logs of the `voy` service run `docker-compose logs -f voy`.

<a name="advanced_config"></a>
# Advanced configuration
- the logging style is inside `logging.yaml`
- the app default env is "development". Set it to "production" with `export FLASK_ENV=production` before running it with `flask run`

<a name="cli"></a>
# Working with the Command Line Interface
This app comes with a custom Command Line Interface (CLI). To use it, you first need to install the app as a package:
- Enter you virtual env with `. venv/bin/activate`
- Run `pip3 install -e .` to install the app as a python package in the virtual env
- You can now run commands with the `voy` command.

Fun fact: The `voy` command can be used the same way as the `flask` command. You can for example start the
app with `voy run`.

The CLI also allows us to add custom commands. One of such is `voy hello-world`. Later on we want to enable a
password reset via the command line.

<a name="biology_analogon"></a>
# This project in biological words (in german)
Ein leerer *Server* ist wie eine Zelle, die nur aus einer Plasmamembran mit Signalproteinen besteht.
*ssh* entspricht diesen Proteinen auf der Plasmamembran, die Signale entgegen nehmen.  

Um die Zelle mit Grundfunktionen auszustatten, importieren wir Ribosome und elementare Netzwerkstrukturen, was in Form des Aufsetzen des Betriebssystem *Ubuntu* erfolgt.  

Das *Docker Image*, welches wir in die Zelle importieren können, entspricht der mtDNA (mitochondriale DNA), wohingegen diese mtDNA ohne das Mitochondrium exisitiert, sondern diese durch die Translation erstmalig mit allen Funktionen bildet.   

*Docker Container* sind nun wie das Mitochondrium. Sie sind eine Zelle in einer größeren Zelle (so die Endosymbiontentheorie). 

Jetzt können aber x-beliebig viele Mitochondrien in der Zelle existieren. Damit man mit ihnen kommunizieren kann, muss man deren entsprechende Membranproteine ansprechen, was *Port-binding* enstpricht

Commit message:

Updated readme on how to work with mails
Added a note on how to access Mailhog and see mails sent from our
application.

README.md, after:

# What is this software about?

A simple tool for the quality control of source documents.    
Designed to fulfill the requirements of a compliant software in EU | Life Science respective to the GDPR.

- [An overview](#overview)
- [Quickstart](#quickstart)
- [Local development](#local_dev)
    - [Get a database](#database)
    - [Initialize the database](#init_database)
    - [Build assets](#build_assets)
    - [Run the app](#run_app)
    - [Mailing](#mailing)
- [Deployment](#deployment)
    - [Debugging](#debugging)
- [Advanced configuration](#advanced_config)
- [Advanced Working with the Command Line Interface](#cli)
- [This project in biological words](#biology_analogon)
  

<a name="overview"></a>
# An overview

-   build with: Python Flask
-   software design pattern: Model-View-Controller (MVC)
-   runs offline: `npm` downloads the JS packages and `parcel.js` bundles them, that they are executable in the project
-   deploy it on a server with: `gunicorn`

![](project_overview.png)

<a name="quickstart"></a>
# Quickstart
1. `cp .example.env .env`
2. `docker-compose up -d voy`
3. `docker-compose exec voy voy database init`    
4. http://localhost:5000/

Optional (for backups):    
4. `cp ofelia.example.ini ofelia.ini`       
5. `docker-compose up -d db-backup`


<a name="local_dev"></a>
# Getting started with local development
1. Create a working virtualenv with `make venv` and activate it with `. venv/bin/activate`

<a name="database"></a>
## 1. Get a database
Don't want to install a local PostgreSQL database?    

1. Copy `.example.env` to `.env`. Use the example values or adapt them to your preference.
2. You can now start your database with `docker-compose up -d db`

<a name="init_database"></a>
## 2. Initialize the database
1. Create the database and the tables with `voy database init`

<a name="init_database_via_docker"></a>
### 2.1 Initialize the database via Docker
When using the docker setup, one can initialize the database by opening a shell inside the python docker container.
1. Start the QC Database App with `docker-compose up -d voy`
2. Open a shell inside the now running container with `docker-compose exec voy /bin/bash`
3. Setup the database like normal in the steps above.

<a name="build_assets"></a>
## 3. Build assets
1. Install node modules with `npm install`
2. Bundle assets with `npm run build`

<a name="develop_assets"></a>
### 3.1 Develop assets
For a more convenient way of working with the CSS and JS assets, run `npm run watch`.

<a name="run_app"></a>
## 4. Run the app 
1. Start the app with `flask run -p 5000`
2. Open http://localhost:5000/

### 4.1 Run the app in Docker
1. Start the app with `docker-compose up -d voy`.   
2. Open http://localhost/ (Port maybe different depending on your `.env` configuration.)

<a name="mailing"></a>
## Mailing
To check and verify outgoing e-mails from our app, the docker setup includes a dummy SMTP server - Mailhog. It is
started together with the app. One can access it under [localhost:5001](http://localhost:5001/) and see sent mails from
our application there.

# Database migrations
To enable updates for live instances of our software, it is crucial to have database migrations. Database migrations
offer a way to adapt an existing databases so that they are on par with the updates made in the code. All this while
preserving the data contained.

Here is how to work with them:

## Create migrations when the model changed
For upgrading live databases it is necessary to always create migrations when changing to the model.

**Attention**: The library we are using, **Flask-Migrate**, internally uses Alembic, which has some **limitations** when
it comes to detecting changes.
**Read more** about that here: https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/autogenerate.html#what-does-autogenerate-detect-and-what-does-it-not-detect

To create a migration:
- Run `flask db migrate -m "<Migration Message>"`. Make sure to enter a meaningful `<Migration Message>`.
- Add the created migration(s) under `migrations/versions` to git.
- Commit your changes to the database model together with the migrations.

## Updating a running database instance
To update a running database instance, just refresh the `migrations` folder from source control and run
`flask db upgrade` command.

<a name="deployment"></a>
# Deployment with Docker
This app includes a Docker setup for live deployment. Here is how to use it:

## Initial Setup
For the initial setup, just follow the instructions described in steps 1., 2.1, 3. and 4.1

## Updating
The setup relies on mounting the code into the container, so code changes are relatively easy to propagate.    
However, when the python dependencies change, a rebuild of the Docker image is necessary.

- Has your `requirements.txt` changed?
  1. Run `docker-compose build` to have Docker update the image with the new dependencies.
  2. Recreate the running containers with `docker-compose up -d voy`    
  
- Only changes in code?
  1. If you changed your static files run: `npm run build`
  2. Gunicorn does not reload your code, so you need to restart your `voy` service: `docker-compose restart voy`

## Scheduled database backups
The Docker setup also includes a container for creating scheduled backups of the database. Here is how to set them up:

1. Copy `ofelia.example.ini` to `ofelia.ini`. Use the example values or adapt them to your preference. See: [mcuadros/ofelia](https://github.com/mcuadros/ofelia)
2. You can now start your database backups with `docker-compose up -d db-backup`

### Adapt the location of the backups
The location where the backups are stored can be adapted in the `.env` file with the `DB_BACKUP_DIR` variable.

<a name="debugging"></a>
## Debugging
To debug gunicorn you can add the `--preload` flag to it. This will give you stack traces to errors that occurred.    
The `--preload` flag is now set by default when using the Docker-Compose setup.

To see the logs of the `voy` service run `docker-compose logs -f voy`.

<a name="advanced_config"></a>
# Advanced configuration
- the logging style is inside `logging.yaml`
- the app default env is "development". Set it to "production" with `export FLASK_ENV=production` before running it with `flask run`

<a name="cli"></a>
# Working with the Command Line Interface
This app comes with a custom Command Line Interface (CLI). To use it, you first need to install the app as a package:
- Enter you virtual env with `. venv/bin/activate`
- Run `pip3 install -e .` to install the app as a python package in the virtual env
- You can now run commands with the `voy` command.

Fun fact: The `voy` command can be used the same way as the `flask` command. You can for example start the
app with `voy run`.

The CLI also allows us to add custom commands. One of such is `voy hello-world`. Later on we want to enable a
password reset via the command line.

<a name="biology_analogon"></a>
# This project in biological words (in german)
Ein leerer *Server* ist wie eine Zelle, die nur aus einer Plasmamembran mit Signalproteinen besteht.
*ssh* entspricht diesen Proteinen auf der Plasmamembran, die Signale entgegen nehmen.  

Um die Zelle mit Grundfunktionen auszustatten, importieren wir Ribosome und elementare Netzwerkstrukturen, was in Form des Aufsetzen des Betriebssystem *Ubuntu* erfolgt.  

Das *Docker Image*, welches wir in die Zelle importieren können, entspricht der mtDNA (mitochondriale DNA), wohingegen diese mtDNA ohne das Mitochondrium exisitiert, sondern diese durch die Translation erstmalig mit allen Funktionen bildet.   

*Docker Container* sind nun wie das Mitochondrium. Sie sind eine Zelle in einer größeren Zelle (so die Endosymbiontentheorie). 

Jetzt können aber x-beliebig viele Mitochondrien in der Zelle existieren. Damit man mit ihnen kommunizieren kann, muss man deren entsprechende Membranproteine ansprechen, was *Port-binding* enstpricht
